+++
date = '2026-04-30T17:20:10+02:00'
draft = false
title = 'In an Integrated World, so too Becomes War'
tags = ['translation', 'quinterna', 'teleriunione', 'march 2026']
original_report = "https://www.quinternalab.org/teleriunioni/2026/marzo-2026/977-in-un-mondo-integrato-anche-la-guerra-lo-diventa"
original_title = "In un mondo integrato anche la guerra lo diventa"
original_date = "March 24, 2026"
featured = true
+++
Tuesday’s evening online meeting began with a comment on the article “[Leggi di simmetria e scenari da incubo](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/10/simmetria_scenari.htm)”[^1] (*n*+1, n. 10, 2002), linking the article’s analysis with the recent Israeli-American attack on Iran, a new chapter of the American *warpolitik*[^2] against the world. 

More than twenty years after the writing of that article, the contradictions of the United States have become more accentuated. The increasing trade deficit, a public debt that is out of control, deindustrialisation, and increasing wealth polarisation, all have weakened the country’s power projection. Today the USA can retain its influence only by defending its *rentier* position. However, global integration (or globalisation) cannot help but exacerbate competition, especially in times of crisis. Marx, in the third volume of *Capital* (“Illusions Created by Competition”), highlighted how competition doesn’t determine the variables of the productive process, but is itself produced by them.

Even the most acute geopolitical analysts, who debate the end of the American Empire, tend to disregard the fact that the ongoing war has the goal of stockpiling shares of surplus value. Concluding forever the colonialist phase, competition nowadays concerns the acquisition of value flows from competitors, which for the USA is the entire world. Such struggle moves via  the application of duties, embargoes, presidential kidnappings, bombardments and much more, compelling the USA to intervene in order to prevent alliances capable of weakening the centrality of the dollar in global trade.

In an integrated world, when shooting, it’s very easy to shoot oneself in the foot. The attack on Iran has had immediate repercussions in the USA, in the form of an increase in fuel prices and even more internal [turmoil](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0gOTbl5ZSI4) within the MAGA movement, which is not in favour of sending American troops to distant [war] theatres.

“*Every symmetrical state can become unstable due to small perturbations, thus its dynamic can assume catastrophic looks*” (“Leggi di simmetria…”[^3]). The so-called asymmetric war that many analysts talk about doesn’t exist. If a war is ongoing, it means that a certain type of symmetry has been established between the [two] sides. When the events push the system towards situations of disequilibrium, a race for new supremacies might trigger, with possible catastrophic effects also on the level of class struggle. The real antithesis is, indeed, that with the future society.

At the current state, the USA and Israel’s attempt at achieving *regime change* in Iran hasn’t been successful: despite the joint attacks and the elimination of high leadership officials, the Iranian government wasn’t overthrown and still keeps significant operational capacities. Iran continues to launch missiles and drones against Israeli targets and American military bases in the region, and its influence over the Strait of Hormuz remains an important element of the conflict. 

For the system, the nightmare is a worldwide Palestine. Syria, Libya, Yemen, Sudan, Somalia, Lebanon, Ukraine: the list of areas out of control starts to expand, not counting the enormous peripheries of the world’s metropoles: “*As with Israel against the Palestinians, but on a global scale, for the United States the enemy is thus the environment it itself produces. But in this case the environment – as we said – is the entire planet*” (“Leggi di simmetria…”[^4]).

Over the past few years, the irreversible crisis of the American deterrence is clearly emerging, that is the capacity of the United States to discourage an adversary before it might consider declaring war. This applies to Israel too, which cannot annihilate its enemies: Hamas endures, just like Hezbollah and the Houthis. Even in Iran, where many key figures of the regime have been eliminated, the military structure remains operative, advantaged by the fact that most weapon factories and armouries have been moved underground.

Tehran’s blockade of the Strait of Hormuz has paralyzed trade for Gulf countries, with negative consequences not only for the United States and Israel, but potentially also for the entire [global economy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OE29FgVtxkk). The conflict risks starting processes that the USA itself might not be able to handle. The recently announced [pact](https://www.middleeasteye.net/news/turkey-saudi-arabia-egypt-and-pakistan-meet-ankara-pushes-security-pact) between Pakistan, Türkiye, Egypt and Saudi Arabia, all Sunni majority countries, is significant for the region's equilibria. Gulf countries no longer feel protected by the American umbrella and might look for new allies.

The goals of the USA and Israel are concordant when military operations go smoothly, but in the face of prolonged difficulties in reaching the set objectives, their goals show their dissonance. Just as competition is a product of the structure of capitalist relations, so is war. As stated in the past, war tends to become permanent: the traditional one, fought by armies, has been flanked for a while by a hybrid war that involves non-state actors (Hamas, Houthis, Hezbollah) and countries that tend to adopt strategies that were once the prerogative of irregular armies.

The might of the USA and Israel clashes with their actual capacity to subjugate the Iranian regime, to subject it to their collective “will”. Wars aren’t won by bombing alone. Iran, with five times the surface area of Italy and almost 100 million inhabitants, is practically impossible to occupy militarily. Already after the first week of the conflict, what was expected from a modern war manifested itself: the lack of ammunition.

[Imperialism](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/25/la_crisi_storica.htm) is nameless, America is an imperialistic country as are others. Lenin stated that imperialism is the last superstructure reached by capitalism, whose historical dynamic evolved from the state monopolies of Emperor Frederick II or of the Maritime Republics to the modern autonomized capital. It is impossible to go further (remaining inside capitalistic categories).

While the world’s attention remains focused on Iran, the war in Ukraine is now little talked about. But there’s a country that serves as the geopolitical zipper between the two conflicts: [Türkiye](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/23/turchia1.htm). A NATO member, the country is a challenge for Israel, due to its imperialist ambitions over the Middle East. The Black Sea, which it borders, is a theatre of conflict between Russia and Ukraine. Ankara has significant regional power projection: it is a former empire (unlike the US) and boasts a Turkish nationalism that extends to China. In Syria it practically deposed Assad; in Libya, Türkiye maintains alliances with the Muslim Brotherhood; and it has signed military deals with Qatar in exchange for gas reserves. In the ongoing “wargame”, Türkiye has experimented with innovative drone usage, even developing a drone-carrying ship that portends a paradigm shift.

In the online meeting’s closure, we mentioned the outcome of the recent referendum about Justice in Italy. Beyond its content and the tensions between factions of the bourgeoisie, the polarisation that brought millions of people to the [polling stations](https://tg24.sky.it/politica/2026/03/24/referendum-2026-giustizia-affluenza-analisi-voto-regioni) is significant. Like a swarm intelligence, where the imitation between components is more important than the awareness of the individual, once a certain threshold is reached the “[social molecules](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/05/manifestazionil_cervello_sociale.htm)” aggregate around “memes”, be they a popular consultation or the flag of Palestine. Today, *social networks* contribute to moving large masses, young people above all: as in only 2025 there were [demonstrations](https://www.chicago86.org/lotte-in-corso/internazionale/1426-l-autunno-caldo-della-generazione-z) and revolts in Madagascar, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Nepal, Peru, Myanmar, Thailand, and Tanzania coordinated via WhatsApp and Discord groups.

The clash between present and future will tend toward clarity, and those illusory democratic-reformisms will end up in the dustbin. Class struggle is generated by the system itself, *“but it cannot forever remain within the system, it can only blow it apart, liberating one of a higher level. It is an antithesis that will produce the appropriate tools, transforming the specular symmetry between capital and labour into a completely different symmetry, the one between the negation of humanity and its affirmation, through the internationalisation of the proletariat and its organisational network at every level.”* (“Leggi di simmetria…”[^5]).

[^1]: Laws of Symmetry and Nightmare Scenarios
[^2]: Portmanteau of *politica* (politics) and *guerra* (war), denoting how the two concepts have coalesced
[^3]: Laws of Symmetry...
[^4]: Laws of Symmetry...
[^5]: Laws of Symmetry...