+++
date = '2026-05-20T22:05:24+02:00'
draft = false
title = 'Towards the Great Gridlock'
summary = ''
tags = ['translation', 'quinterna', 'teleriunione', 'april 2026']
original_report = "https://www.quinternalab.org/teleriunioni/2026/aprile-2026/981-verso-il-grande-ingorgo"
original_title = "Verso il grande ingorgo"
original_date = "April 28, 2026"
+++
Tuesday evening’s online meeting began with an analysis of recent news about the war against Iran.

In April, an Iranian [attack](https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-war-disrupts-the-circuit-board-supply-chain-raises-costs-tech-firms-2026-04-27/) hit a Saudi petrochemical plant in the industrial city of Jubail, interrupting the production of a fundamental resin for printed circuit boards, parts which are inside almost all electronic devices. Recently, Iran has threatened a possible attack against undersea cables, a move that might heavily compromise internet communications in the Gulf States. The Strait of Hormuz, as a matter of fact, isn’t just a junction for the ships that transport raw materials and semifinished products, but it’s also a corridor crisscrossed by a network of bedrocks supporting strategically important internet.

Undersea cables are [critical infrastructures](https://www.wired.it/article/iran-cavi-internet-sottomarini-stretto-hormuz-bersaglio-guerra/) that carry 90% of the global internet traffic and they prove to be more and more vulnerable to attacks and incidents, as shown by the simultaneous wrecking of four connections in the Red Sea in February 2024, that caused serious disruptions between Europe, Africa, and Asia. The *Corriere della Sera* titles one of their articles “[Hormuz, il nuovo fronte sono i cavi sottomarini in fibra ottica: la strategia dell’Iran e l’incubo della «catastrofe digitale»](https://www.corriere.it/esteri/26_aprile_24/hormuz-cavi-sottomarini-catastrofe-digitale-3fefaea0-e8ef-4c66-af35-33036c94fxlk.shtml)”[^1] (Giusi Fasano):

> *“Those cables (according to some analysts they carry over 15% of the global data traffic) are digital oxygen for the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Iraq… Harming them doesn’t just mean interrupting social media or having a slow internet connection within the region. The most vital front would be the economic one. Millions of daily transactions through banking and financial markets would fall through. AI data centres in the Emirates and the global financial hub of Dubai would face substantial issues. There would likely be consequences for the clouds of major digital firms. Economic issues (even if minor) would become an inevitable cascade in Africa, Europe, and Asia.”*

In the article "Wargame. Non solo un gioco"[^2] (*n*+1, n. 50), the chapter titled "Intrecci trascurati"[^3] examines a series of internal relationships within capitalism, in order to carry out an abstract simulation, yet realistic enough to effectively describe the social structure and the modalities of change. What emerges is a system that, as a whole, appears unable to find a way out. Several of our works contribute to demonstrating and supporting this thesis, including: "La crisi del capitalismo senile"[^4] (1984); "Dinamica dei processi storici, Vol. I – Teoria dell'accumulazione"[^5] (1992); "La Guerra del Golfo e le sue conseguenze"[^6] (1990-91); "Globalizzazione"[^7] (Lettere ai compagni n. 40, 1999); "Teoria e prassi della nuova politiguerra americana"[^8] (*n*+1 n. 11, march-june 2003); "La legge della miseria crescente"[^9] (*n*+1 n. 20, december 2006); "Un modello dinamico di crisi"[^10] (*n*+1 n. 24, december 2008); "Numero speciale sull'energia" (*n*+1 n. 31, april 2012)[^11].

The revolution introduced by the *container* made it possible to standardize multi-purpose freight containers on a global scale, forcing everyone to adapt. The warehouse has become *something else*, ceasing to be a simple storage facility: today, what is needed is produced when it is needed, according to market demands, and shipped according to the *just-in-time* principle. The capitalism of recent decades has broken down [corporate walls](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/04/rottura_azienda.htm), spreading across the territory through logistics. In this context, problems in *choke points*, specific transit points for commodities and data, represent a malfunction for this immense global factory distributed across the planet. Today's capitalism has not fallen into yet another cyclical crisis, but into a systemic gridlock: a situation of [irreversible entropy](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/31/massimo_di_entropia.htm).
Maritime straits and strategic passage points have always existed, but the novelty lies in the fact that humanity lives concentrated in large metropoles. Over 56% of the world's population is crammed into cities, in Europe, this figure reaches 76%. In recent years, films, novels, and essays have imagined apocalyptic scenarios characterised by mass rushes in supermarkets, flights from cities, and generalised chaos. The Covid-19 pandemic represented a kind of dress rehearsal for what could happen in the near future. The systemic gridlock does not depend solely on the closure of the straits, but also on other structural factors such as the growth of fictitious capital and the expansion of public debt: in the United States, it has reached approximately 40 trillion dollars, while [globally](https://www.usdebtclock.org/world-debt-clock.html) it stands at around 350 trillion.

For years we have been noticing the effects of a general slowdown of the economy. When we speak of fictitious capital, we must think of the immense quantity of financial instruments moved by large investment funds, e.g., BlackRock, which manage masses of capital in the order of billions of dollars. The march of Capital's autonomisation from its very owners means that human beings find themselves chasing a dynamic that can only lead to a revolutionary bifurcation.
The recent assassination attempt on Donald Trump can be linked to the murder of conservative politician Charlie Kirk, as well as to the attack carried out by Luigi Mangione against the CEO of UnitedHealthcare, a leader in the private healthcare sector. According to journalist Federico Rampini, these episodes bear witness to the growing polarisation underway in the USA and the radicalisation of some social components. In recent years, according to his analysis, the disruptive aspect has been the proletarianisation of intellectual classes. This social mutation could, in turn, lead to a political mutation. [Rampini writes](https://www.corriere.it/oriente-occidente-federico-rampini/26_aprile_27/teoria-violenza-politica-usa-f1cdd43b-9cd1-41d8-9238-84e0e7d30xlk.shtml):

> *"The starting point is a broken promise, at least for some. For decades in the United States, college degrees were sold as the sure passport to stability: study, go into debt if necessary, invest in yourself, and the market will reward you. That promise now appears to some young people as a scam. The cost of university has risen, student debt is a burden, rents in cities where skilled jobs are concentrated have exploded, access to prestigious professions has narrowed. Artificial intelligence is an additional threat, with the ritual sacrifice of certain jobs. Thus, the young graduate discovers that they have not joined the bourgeoisie, but rather a new condition of dependency: a bartender with a master's degree, an underpaid journalist, a coder at risk of layoff, an intermittent screenwriter, a creative without protections, an Apple Store or Starbucks employee with cultural credentials above their salary."*

The USA, the heart of capitalism, produces the conditions for an anti-system movement to emerge. The petty bourgeoisie, inclined toward stability when capitalism guarantees its incomes, goes into convulsions when these are eroded.

The director of *Limes*, Lucio Caracciolo, speaking about the war and the out-of-control situation in which the world finds itself, hopes for the emergence of some form of rationality, otherwise the human species would be at great risk. The problem is that this system is caught in the vortex of market anarchy. Even the physicist Carlo Rovelli invokes a surge of rationality, arguing that the task of scientists is to contribute to the emergence of a scientific point of view capable of preventing the species from heading toward the [abyss](https://video.corriere.it/cronaca/carlo-rovelli-e-la-cattiva-coscienza-dei-fisici-siamo-sull-orlo-di-una-guerra-terribile-non-serve-uno-sciocco-pacifismo-ma-razionalita-/e9df15ff-947e-479b-919c-3623dbd86xlk) (*La cattiva coscienza dei fisici*[^12]). But we know well that, using the political and economic categories made available by this social formation, it's impossible to solve the problems it generates.

For the Left, communism is a life plan for the species, threatened by the persistence, on the scene, of the capitalist zombie, highly rational in the production of goods, but equally irrational from a social point of view. In the schema of the [reversal of praxis](https://www.quinterna.org/archivio/1945_1951/19510401_Teoria_e_azione_nella_dottrina_marxista_Sommario.htm) (1951), it is observed how initially social molecules move in a disordered manner, to then progressively take on a structure, passing through different levels of organisation (*top-down* and *bottom-up* information flows), until the inauguration of the revolutionary party.

The world population has reached 8 billion people, of which over 4 billion are urbanised, 2 billion are wage workers, 3 billion are unemployed, precariously employed, enslaved, or in any case considered poor. Any forecast about the future of this system cannot fail to take these numbers into account.

[^1]: Hormuz, the new front is the underwater optical fibre cables: Iran's strategy and the nightmare of a «digital catastrophe»
[^2]: Wargame. Not Only a Game
[^3]: Overlooked Interconnections
[^4]: The Crisis of Senile Capitalism
[^5]: Dynamics of Historical Processes, Vol. I – Theory of Accumulation
[^6]: The Gulf War and Its Consequences
[^7]: Globalisation
[^8]: Theory and Praxis of the New American *Warpolitik*
[^9]: The Law of Increasing Misery
[^10]: A Dynamic Model of Crisis
[^11]: Special Issue on Energy
[^12]: The Bad Conscience of Physicists
