+++
date = '2026-05-20T22:05:24+02:00'
draft = false
title = 'Türkiye as Geopolitical Fulcrum'
summary = ''
tags = ['translation', 'quinterna', 'teleriunione', 'april 2026']
original_report = "https://www.quinternalab.org/teleriunioni/2026/febbraio-2026/971-crisi-del-giappone-o-della-legge-del-valore"
original_title = "La Turchia come fulcro geopolitico"
original_date = "April 21, 2026"
+++
The online meeting started by revisiting the article "[L'Europa virtuale e i nuovi attrattori d'Eurasia: la Turchia come fulcro dinamico](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/23/turchia1.htm)"[^1], published in the 23rd issue of the periodical.

These last weeks’ news is that Ankara is promoting a project aiming to pipe crude oil extracted in southern Iraq to the Mediterranean, bypassing the route through the Bab el-Mandeb Strait. The Israeli-American War against Iran has pushed Türkiye to expedite the development of the Southern Sorridor (the final tract of the [Middle Corridor](https://it.insideover.com/economia/middle-corridor-contro-imec-la-turchia-e-la-battaglia-della-logistica-dopo-hormuz.html)), a net of infrastructure used for the transportation of goods and energy that connects Asia (China) to Europe through Azerbaijan, its ally. 

The India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor ([IMEC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India–Middle_East–Europe_Economic_Corridor)) project, sponsored by Israel, the United Arab Emirates, and India, was born as an alternative to the Chinese Silk Road and will extend to  the Mediterranean as well. From the clash of counterposed interests originate conflicts of various kinds, the redefinition of commercial routes and, in some cases, the disruption of supply chains.

The Israeli government is working on the creation of a security "[hexagon](https://scenarieconomici.itlesagono-di-netanyahu-la-nuova-architettura-geopolitica-tra-il-mediterraneo-e-lindo-pacifico/)", a strategic set of alliances extending from India to Greece and Cyprus, also including some "moderate" Arab countries, with the aim of countering both the Shiite axis (Iran, Hamas, Houthis, Hezbollah) and the Sunni axis ("Islamic NATO", a pact between Türkiye, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Egypt, and Qatar). Türkiye, a NATO member endowed with the Alliance's second-largest army after that of the United States, is at the same time a rival of Israel, Greece, and Russia. Using the *wargame* method implemented with/through set theory, one can observe how an actor may be an ally in one context and an adversary in another. The contemporary capitalistic system thus appears increasingly characterized by "fuzzy" configurations.

Relations between Israel and Türkiye worsened with the fall of Bashar al-Assad's regime in Syria, which was deposed precisely by pro-Turkish militias. The Syrian buffer zone has thus become a contested ground, and Türkiye's "activism" in the Gaza Strip (Muslim Brotherhood) and in Libya is highly indicative of a clear strategy of influence. In our article on Türkiye, we pointed out how the country, precisely because of its geographical position, is subject to pressures from multiple directions, which it tends to offload both towards the Mediterranean and towards the Heartland, the Core of the World. Its power projection extends as far as the Turkophone populations of western China, allowing Ankara to exert a certain influence over that area thanks to common linguistic and cultural roots, involving altogether about 200 million people.

Türkiye occupies an important [geographical hinge](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/17/cerniera_balcanica.htm) whose centrality is rooted in the millenia-old history of the region. It is a bridge between Europe (to the northwest), the Balkans (to the north), Asia (to the east), and the Middle East (to the south), a condition that has fostered a peculiar historical and political development. In Figure 1 shown in "L'Europa virtuale e i nuovi attrattori d'Eurasia..."[^2] it is highlighted how, in the main models of the fathers of geopolitics, Türkiye lies at an intersection point of global trade and economic routes.

Türkiye is a modern and populous country (about 85 million inhabitants), with a young and strong proletariat; its mass army, on more than one occasion, has carried out coup d'états in defense of the secularism of the State. Ankara is also one of the main producers of drones for military purposes: between 2018 and 2023, it exported 65% of the drones produced worldwide, positioning itself, for all intents and purposes, as a strategic partner for numerous countries.

In the Middle East there are two former empires, Türkiye and Iran. While the latter has demonstrated considerable resilience, allowing it to pursue an adaptive strategy against formidable adversaries such as Israel and the USA, Türkiye possesses greater conventional military strength. The fact remains that, although allied with the USA within NATO, Ankara has progressively consolidated its own geopolitical autonomy in recent years. Tel Aviv continues to be a fundamental pivot of the alliance with Washington, but Türkiye plays an indispensable strategic role for the eastern flank of the Atlantic Alliance. In this context,a potential open [conflict](https://www.analisidifesa.it/2026/04/le-guerre-di-israele-dopo-liran-la-turchia/) between Israel and Türkiye would represent a systemic shock to the architecture of collective security over the last decade, shattering the selfsame USA.

Türkiye carried out a bourgeois revolution (from above), therefore Turkish nationalism is nothing more than the preservation of the results achieved over nearly a century (in 2016 we wrote a [newsletter](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/newsletter/nws_220.htm) following the attempted coup d'état in the country, the origins of which have never been clearly understood). Israel, on the contrary, cannot boast such a long history; it is a transplant of capitalism into the middle of the desert, constantly exposed to significant internal and external pressures. Even though, throughout its existence, it has always managed to wage quick and targeted wars, since October 7th, 2023, it has fallen into a more extensive and prolonged war dynamic, on seven different fronts, with no end in sight.

The USA is trying to prevent any erosion in its power, as well as in its role as a global *rentier*. The war on Iran is a show of force, also towards China, and is a clear signal to the Gulf countries. But the situation on the ground shows that their military superiority is insufficient to force Iran’s full submission. The outcome of this *wargame* could lead to a [general collapse](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/36/verso_il_collasso_epocale.htm) of the capitalist system, since no actor can take over in a mode of production that is increasingly losing energy. The American-led unipolar imperialist order presents several critical issues, while powers such as China, Russia, Türkiye, and India do not possess an economic-financial structure capable of replacing that of Washington.

Capitalism has run its course. This is demonstrated by the global race for leadership in artificial intelligence, which produces ever more powerful systems capable of eliminating millions of jobs. On the X accounts of Peter Thiel and Alex Karp—respectively the founder and CEO of Palantir, the tech giant that provides technological services (software based on AI systems) to the United States government—22 points of a [manifesto](https://www.repubblica.it/tecnologia/2026/04/20/news/palantir_manifesto_22_punti_ia_armi_visione_karp_silicon_valley-425294198/) were posted, outlining a clear political-entrepreneurial program. Point 1 states: *"Silicon Valley owes a moral debt to the country that made its rise possible. The engineering elite of Silicon Valley has an affirmative obligation to participate in the defense of the nation."* In point 12 we read: *"[...] One age of deterrence, the atomic age, is ending, and a new era of deterrence built on A.I. is set to begin."*

The manifesto is inspired by A. Karp's essay, *The Technological Republic*, in which he argues that in order to preserve the current civilisation, a fusion between the American State and the world of new technologies is necessary.

Anthropic, recently under the spotlight due to  the release of Mythos, its latest powerful artificial intelligence model, received 5 billion [dollars](https://www.ansa.it/canale_tecnologia/notizie/tecnologia/2026/04/21/amazon-ha-investito-5-miliardi-in-anthropic_d3cf56df-eac1-4118-bf54-bfe17e58a4cb.html) from Amazon and 40 billion from Google. Google, Palantir, Amazon have played a role in the development of AI systems used in Gaza, particularly in deciphering the movements of Hamas militants; the e-commerce giant based in Seattle uses advanced systems in its logistics warehouses, for moving and controlling both men and goods. War, like business, is increasingly managed by intelligent machines that relegate human intervention to being a secondary factor. As we wrote in "[Ideologie di un capitalismo che nega sé stesso](https://quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/57/ideologie-di-un-capitalismo-che-nega-se-stesso.htm)"[^3]:

> *"A new, technologically advanced corporatism is taking hold (composed of AI systems connected to a myriad of sensors), and it makes no sense to respond with a Third-International-style frontism, already wrong and ineffective at the time it was theorised. Nor is it useful to repeat like parrots the slogans of the past revolution, material reality pushes us forward, modifying approaches and languages; those who do not adapt to change by adopting a cybernetic paradigm are destined for extinction. There is no (revolutionary) invariance over time without transformation."*

[^1]: The Potential ‘Europe’ and the New Attractors of Eurasia: Türkiye as a Dynamic Fulcrum
[^2]: The Potential ‘Europe’ and the New Attractors of Eurasia…
[^3]: Ideologies of a Capitalism That Negates Itself