+++
date = '2026-04-30T17:18:46+02:00'
draft = false
title = 'War as a Symmetry Break'
summary = ''
tags = ['translation', 'quinterna', 'teleriunione', 'april 2026']
original_report = "https://www.quinternalab.org/teleriunioni/2026/marzo-2026/976-la-guerra-come-rottura-di-simmetria"
original_title = "La guerra come rottura di simmetria"
original_date = "March 17, 2026"
+++
During Tuesday’s online meeting we have taken up a few passages from the *abstract* of the monographic issue “[Teoria e prassi della nuova politiguerra americana](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/11/11_rivista.htm)[^1] (*n*+1, n. 11)”, placing them in the context of  the ongoing conflict in the Middle East.

Over twenty years after it was published, the monographic issue remains valid for understanding the evolution of the capitalist world, which is facing a crisis of structural nature attributable to the difficulty in producing surplus value. In such a context, capital pushes the United States to take on actions that end up damaging their own interests. On the one hand capital seeks the *free* circulation of capital and commodities, while on the other hand the anarchy that it creates requires increasingly centralised methods of *control*.

The American government, unable to take on the role of the only government of global capitalism, bends the needs of capital to its own particular interests; consequently, control of the world turns into the opposite of what it should be, becoming inefficient, if not counterproductive. After all, by remaining inside the capitalist framework one can’t help but reproduce its contradictions. The rest of the world can’t keep on supporting the US forever, but at the same time it struggles to free itself from American hegemony: *“The enemies of the US are forced to die of ‘gradual’ asphyxiation to escape a chaotic one, at the same time where America has to die of hyper-oxygenation to run from asphyxiation.”*

The preventive *politiguerra*[^2] against the world is motivated by the necessity to preserve an order that is crumbling. The United States and its president can't do whatever they want though: the negation of [free will](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/53/sul-libero-arbitrio.htm) isn’t exclusively imposed on those who have to suffer the effects of any force, but also on those that impose the force.

The article “Teoria e prassi”[^3] makes a connection to "symmetries", that is, to the fact that two enemies can’t find themselves in a perfect equilibrium, otherwise their forces would cancel each other out. In the conflict between the United States and Israel on one side and Iran on the other (though other entities support Tehran), if there were a total symmetry there would be no war; as a matter of fact, every player tries to move the equilibrium in its favour. Initially Iranians have attacked the Gulf states and successively [blocked](https://www.reuters.com/graphics/IRAN-CRISIS/MAPS/znpnmelervl/#gulf-oil-producers-scramble-to-bypass-hormuz-as-iran-locks-down-the-strait) the Strait of Hormuz, while the United States and Israel keep on bombing the country, eliminating missile positions and members of the Iranian leadership.

Even with the existence of a technological and economical gap between the two contenders, there can be established a symmetry, as illustrated in the article “[Leggi di simmetria e scenari da incubo](https://www.quinterna.org/pubblicazioni/rivista/10/simmetria_scenari.htm)”[^4]. An example is the conflict between Hamas and Israel: the attack of October 7th 2023, carried out by Palestinian armed organisations that lacked Israel’s military and technological capabilities, showed how a symmetry is possible despite the fact that the adversary has advanced weaponry and one of the most prepared *intelligence* services in the world.

With their victory in the Second World War, the USA has imposed its “will” on the rest of the Planet. If they were to lose their deterrence capabilities, they would be destined to collapse, being strictly dependent on global surplus value. In the study “Il corso del capitalismo mondiale”[^5] (*Il programma comunista* from 1956 to 1958), our guiding school of thought reaffirms how the end of this societal form is not hypothetical, but certain; it deduces this by examining the industrial production trend, the tendential fall of the rate of profit, the difficulty of extracting surplus value and the degree of mineralisation of the Planet, that causes epochal turmoils.

America still has an unmatchable army, but they are helpless compared to the anonymous and impersonal dynamics generated by capitalism that have led the country to having a public debt out of control.

The current war, which has already taken on a global scale and manifests itself through levying duties,kidnapping presidents, and launching missiles. Once beyond a certain threshold, it will lead to upheaval in the old equilibria. Compared to what was observed in “Teoria e prassi”[^6], the contradictions have further deepened. China for example is, by now, a rival capable of competing with the United States in strategic sectors such as robotics, space and artificial intelligence, while emerging giants such as India and Turkey have appeared on the international chessboard.

Besides oil and gas, the partial closure of the Strait of Hormuz is already bringing about a shortage of raw materials, first and foremost of chemical components necessary to the production of [fertilisers](https://www.ilsole24ore.com/art/non-solo-petrolio-hormuz-passa-terzo-fertilizzanti-mondiali-ecco-l-impatto-sull-agricoltura-ue-e-italiana-AIta0XzB?refresh_ce=1). The lengthening of the blockade will have repercussions on the global supply chain (*The Economist*, “[The Iran war may be about to escalate](https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2026/03/15/the-iran-war-may-be-about-to-escalate)”). If the Iran war keeps on going, at a certain point there will not be sufficient ammunition to fight it. In the first 10 days of the war Gulf states have used 800 American-manufactured Patriot missiles to neutralise Iranian launches, a superior number to the one reached by Ukraine in four years of war against Russia, equal to about 600 missiles (*The Economist*, “[Gulf states are burning through interceptors](https://www.economist.com/international/2026/03/13/gulf-states-are-burning-through-interceptors)”).

Iran isn’t Iraq, neither in its history, nor in the configuration of its armed forces and state structure, nor from a geographic and demographic point of view: the country has multiple metropoles and a capital with 16 million inhabitants. Moreover, to support the Islamic Republic there is the informal coalition named the Axis of Resistance; [Lebanon](https://www.ispionline.it/it/pubblicazione/libano-la-guerra-nella-guerra-233056), where the pro-Iranian militia Hezbollah is operating, was hit severely by Israel (with more than 1000 deaths and almost 1 million evacuees).

For now the Bab-el-Mandeb strait remains open, but Tehran can always decide to play the “Houthi” card.

War erupts because there is a desperate search to break equilibrium: Iran has gone around its condition of military inferiority with regards to Israel and the USA by determining another type of symmetry, that is, by inflicting chaos onto the global economy and, particularly, to the Gulf states. The Istituto Studi Politici Internazionali[^7] (ISPI), in the video called “[Stretto di Hormuz, quanto ci costa questa guerra?](https://www.ispionline.it/it/pubblicazione/podcast-globally-stretto-di-hormuz-quanto-ci-costa-questa-guerra-232719)”[^8], reported several facts regarding the economic consequences of the conflict, highlighting that Iran already has an atomic bomb at its disposal, that is, the capability of [closing the Strait](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=65504). Currently hundreds of ships are blocked, also because of the price increase of insurance fees.

War is not a phenomenon that allows itself to be used. The USA now finds itself  having to solve the Hormuz problem, and it is in its interests  to [involve](https://www.ansa.it/sito/notizie/mondo/2026/03/16/trump-contro-gli-alleati-e-la-nato-ma-leuropa-lo-molla-su-hormuz_595a7bf6-9e4b-4631-a9ac-d4a2794cba2d.html) European countries and their allies in the conflict. There could thus be put in motion a chain of events that nobody would be able to control. Every State has its own strategies intended to exploit situations of changing equilibria: China lets the USA get stuck in the Middle East, Turkey becomes a fundamental actor in the region and Russia sells oil at a higher price.

The  MAGA movement, of which Trump is the spokesman, is in turmoil due to  the war against Iran, since the lengthening of the conflict generates negative economic effects, starting with an increase of the price of fuel. The Americans lost the Vietnam War because the internal frontline collapsed, and similar phenomena may occur again in the future. As the *abstract* of “Teoria e prassi”[^9] observes:

> *“The direction of historical motion… is irreversible. But such motion doesn’t have a linear nature: it proceeds through bifurcations, through fractures, and American imperialism has to be observed also from the point of view of the effects it produces inside the United States itself and not only in the world of others. In the world of aliens you can be an alien also towards yourself.”*

It is a matter of moving the focus from the photography of the war to its cinematography, going from the analysis of the *object* to that of the *process*. Marx treated with a new method results others had reached, connecting with each other aspects that beforehand were considered separated. Current events interest us above all as a proof of Marxist theory. The works of the Communist Left on war and on the state of capitalism offer us a compass that lets us orient ourselves in the stormy sea.

For capitalism there exists an enemy without country nor army, but extremely dangerous: the reserveless class. The system’s crisis produces social chaos, multiplying irrational impulses (see the "No Vax" crowd during the Covid-19 pandemic, or the phenomena of religious fanaticism such as Peter Thiel's [Roman lectures](https://www.fanpage.it/politica/che-cosa-ha-detto-peter-thiel-nelle-lezioni-sullanticristo-che-sta-tenendo-a-roma/) dedicated to the Antichrist). At the same time, there emerges the necessity of reading social reality through a rational approach, thus adopting the scientific method.

[^1]: Theory and Praxis of the New American *Politiguerra*
[^2]: Portmanteau of *politica* (politics) and *guerra* (war), denoting how the two concepts have coalesced
[^3]: Theory and Praxis
[^4]: Laws of Symmetry and Nightmare Scenarios
[^5]: The Course of Global Capitalism
[^6]: Theory and Praxis
[^7]: International Political Studies Institute
[^8]: Strait of Hormuz, how much is this war costing us?
[^9]: Theory and Praxis